BOX 1 Key points regarding travelers’ diarrhea for pharmacists The release of the 2017 guidelines for the prevention and treatment of travelers’ diarrhea has resulted in significant changes in the management of travelers’ diarrhea, many of which affect community pharmacy practice. The key points of interest to pharmacists are summarized here: • Classification of TD ○ TD severity should be based on a patient’s self-determination: □ Mild: Tolerable, nondistressing and does not interfere with planned activities □ Moderate: Distressing or interfering with planned activities □ Severe: Incapacitating or completing stopping all planned activities, including dysentery and nondysentery presentations □ Persistent: Diarrhea lasting ≥2 weeks • TD prophylaxis ○ Prophylaxis is not routinely used but can be considered for patients at high risk of health-related complications secondary to TD such as: □ prior clinically significant history of potential additional morbidity following an enteric infection (e.g., inflammatory bowel disease, reactive arthritis) and □ chronic illness that predisposes patient to TD (e.g., achlorhydria, gastrectomy) or its complications (e.g., immunocompromised, diabetes, renal dysfunction). ○ Prophylaxis may be considered for travelers who cannot afford to become sick with TD because of their occupation or itinerary reasons (e.g., athlete in competition, musician, politician). □ Bismuth subsalicylate may be considered for most travelers as prophylaxis. □ If antibiotic prophylaxis is indicated, rifaximin is the recommended agent. • Mild TD ○ Patients can use loperamide for the treatment of mild TD to decrease the duration of diarrhea and frequency of passing unformed stool. • Moderate TD ○ Functional impairment and itinerary changes are the main factors to consider when using self-determining to use antibiotics for moderate TD. □ Antibiotic treatment options available in Canada are azithromycin and fluoroquinolones (when traveling outside of Southeast Asia). □ Because of emerging global resistance and efficacy, pharmacists may notice a shift in prescribing practices, in which azithromycin is used as the first-line treatment for both moderate and severe TD. ○ Loperamide can be used either alone or as an adjunct to antibiotics. • Severe TD ○ Travelers should be educated on how to self-diagnose dysentery (presence of blood in the stool, possibly accompanied by fever and/or abdominal pain) to determine appropriate treatment measures. ○ Antibiotics should be used for severe travelers’ diarrhea, both dysentery and nondysentery, with azithromycin being the antibiotic of choice. □ Loperamide may also be used as an adjunct to azithromycin, in the absence of dysentery.
For both nondysenteric and dysenteric TD, azithromycin is the preferred agent because of its low global resistance against invasive pathogens and tolerable safety profile.38-41 A single-dose antibiotic regimen can be tried initially and continued daily for up to 3 days if symptoms are not resolved within 24 hours. Therefore, pharmacists should ensure patients are provided sufficient antibiotics to allow for both a single dose and a complete 3-day regimen. Fluoroquinolones may be used to treat severe, nondysenteric TD, provided the traveler is not going to Southeast or South Asia (due to Campylobacter resistance) and a proper risk-benefit assessment has been completed regarding its safety profile. Rifaximin may also be used to treat severe, nondysenteric TD, provided the traveler is not going to a region that has a high risk of invasive pathogens, due to the drug’s lack of efficacy against them. However, as mentioned, this product is not available in a suitable strength in Canada and would need to be acquired by patients abroad, limiting its applicability to Canadian travelers. As with moderate diarrhea, combination therapy consisting of antibiotics with loperamide improves time to clinical cure compared with antibiotics alone. However, the combination should not be employed when dysentery is present.
TD has previously been classified quantitatively, based on the number of loose bowel movements experienced in a day (e.g., mild = 1-2 stools/24 hours, moderate = 3-5 stools/24 hours and severe = 6-9 stools/24 hours).4,5 Classification is now qualitative, based on the functional impact TD has on the patient and his or her ability to participate in activities planned during travel (Table 1).